[Music]
welcome to fully charged we've got a
fantastic episode for you today all
about a really interesting potential
future energy source as everything
becomes more electrified all that
electricity has to come from somewhere
and because we're interested in a zero
carbon future we hear a lot about
renewables about solar and wind and
waves but there's another possibility a
shadowy partner that we don't hear so
much about and that is fusion there's
two ways of getting energy out of atoms
you can take really big atoms like
uranium and split them apart that's
efficient that powers our existing
nuclear reactors and as we know it's got
quite a lot of downsides but you can
also take quite small atoms like
hydrogen and helium and fuse them
together and that gives out energy
that's what powers the Sun the fuel is
simple it's an amazing potential energy
source it would be absolutely brilliant
if we could power our civilization using
that
[Music]
so if fusion is that useful why aren't
we doing it already well as a technical
challenge its impressive if you need
fabulously high temperatures and
pressures and that's why I've come here
today to first like Fusion because they
think the solution might lie in little
things like this
[Music]
let's just start with the basics what is
beauty so Fusion is the joining of light
elements together so it's the opposite
to nuclear power which is splitting
heavy elements and because of the way
the physics works both of those
processes release energy but with with
fusion you have none of the high-level
waste and none of the risk of meltdown
and all of the negative parts of fission
power and this has been in that this
ideas been around for a long time has it
was this joke that fusion was always 40
years away and what you're doing is it
still for just very quickly so what is
it still 40 years away so a lot a lot of
the early history of fusion maybe it
says something about the ambition of
physicists you know a year after it was
actually discovered that the Sun was
powered by fusion people were proposing
fusion power so of course it was a long
time away away them even even know what
the reactions were let alone leave any
detail physics now a lot of the detailed
physics is done and there's a lot of
different ways of kind of making that
reaction happen and no one sort of got
over the the milestone of energy gained
yet so the basic game here is that you
take these very small elements so these
are things like hydrogen and lithium
they're very a super small atom and you
have to get them close enough together
to make all this happen why why is that
hard it's hard because they don't want
to be close together so they're both you
have two ions because of the
temperatures for fusion there's no atoms
left all the electrons are going to move
so the ions and they're both positively
charged so they want to repel and you
need to get them close enough if you can
get them close enough they have a chance
to diffuse so that so this is the mental
image here is that you've got these
little things and they're all it's
almost like pinball gone mad there's
lots of little things bouncing around
and the hotter you make it the faster
they go and the more you squish it all
together the more often they collide so
what sort of temperatures and pressures
are we talking about because it all of
that sounds very nice lieutenant
temperature is an immutable constant for
all fusion processes regardless of the
technology because it's set by the ions
having to come together and you have to
be a hundred million degrees Kelvin
we're not supposed to say that casually
yes Kelvin that's actually part of from
the Sun so the Sun fuses hydrogen where
as we use isotopes of hydrogen because
it's an easy
reaction so my like fun fact about the
Sun is and per unit volume its heat
output is actually less than the
metabolic keep output of a person so
because hydrogen is really hard to fuse
the Sun is actually kind of rubbish at
it it's just huge so we need a more
efficient reaction and an alternative
higher temperature as well getting to
have these high temperatures and
densities that's energy intensive all by
itself so you need to put a lot of
energy in so you did mention this word
energy gain and you want to get more
back just go through that a little bit
yeah so and you have to pay a certain
amount of energy to heat the ions to
give them enough energy to actually over
enough velocity to overcome the
repulsion and then when they fuse they
release a certain amount of energy you
look at the ratio of those two it's
something like 300 so that's that's how
much energy you can kind of get back out
in principle from the reaction so what's
your first like fusion what what's your
solution to this problem so we have a
new approach to inertial food which we
call a projectile fusion basically we
launch a high velocity projectile and
that flies and then it hits into a fuel
pellet which we call the target and then
the target is the hard physics problem
of what we're doing it has to
effectively focus some energy of that
projectile into the fusion fuel and it
has to concentrate the energy which is
being delivered by the projectile so for
the project I'll the most important
thing is its velocity
Machinery update shop procedure for shop
97 is commencing when you're ready to
start
[Music]
but voltage criteria okay why why is
everything these massive great big boxes
yes they look a bit odd these big grey
boxes so we have two of them we have all
our machine diagnostics it's sort of 200
current probe and then our enclosure we
have all our experimental optical
Diagnostics and we go through the care
for less see your door right seriously
yeah so the idea here is that because
what you're doing is so incredibly fast
yeah you need very short you need pulse
lasers yeah very short bursts of light
to work out what's happening so you
imagine the kind of first high speed
photography was a horse running over the
finishing line is that very classic
photo and I used a very high speed a
bright flash lamp to do that as all
photographers use as you go faster and
faster flash lamp doesn't cut the
mustard so what you have to use instead
is really bright lasers to backlight
what you're doing and as well as doing
that what we use our gated cameras they
do a very very short exposure so this
white camera here is a allows you to
take a three nanosecond exposure that's
like that's amazing it's just stopped on
that because 3 nanoseconds but in that
time light which is the fastest thing in
the universe will travel 15 meters and I
got myself yeah yeah the point is not
very far off yeah and so in the time
light takes to cross this table that
that will have opened the shutter and
closer shots from taking off with that
that's yeah it's normally quick and it's
really interesting technology and all
these cameras which is probably why
they're so expensive of course I think
this white camera here cost calls for a
million pounds there's one company in
the world
this whole thing is a kind of
speedometer done exactly but a
projectile which is it can be many
things in this case it's a flying thing
both of this and up getting in something
and you ought to know that speed and
because it's so fast this is what it
takes exactly yeah
so tell me about how machine three
launches the projector so it's it's what
we call an electromagnetic launcher so
basically it's like a railgun
because because velocity is most
important well that takes us to is a a
very low-mass projectile maybe one gram
but going extremely extremely fast so
what's extremely fast so machinery
should get to between twenty and thirty
kilometres per second so to put that in
context it will accelerate the
projectile to twice the escape velocity
of earth in about five millimeters
betrayer tell me about the target so
inside the target there's a little
pocket that's got fuel tell me a little
bit better yeah so so this on the screen
shows and one of our simulations it's
rendered so it looks like nice CGI /
this is actually an accurate simulation
so what you have is is a plastic cube
and inside that cube there's a little
spherical cavity and that's where the
fuel is and this is the same thing but
in real life so so it's as if there was
a penny hitting the back exactly yeah so
the thing which is looks like copper is
a copper projectile that's ten
millimeters in diameter one millimeter
thick that's hitting this front face and
then the cavity inside what happens when
the projectile hits is it creates an
enormous pressure and you perform at a
pressure wave shock wave and the
pressure wave moves through the target
as it moves over the top of the cavity
the gas inside has no choice it can't it
can't just disappear and escape that
pressure wave so the cavity gets
collapsed and the gas inside gets really
strongly heated so for a brief fraction
of a second we have something which is
hotter than the Sun and dense than LED
inside this thing something which I like
to point out is if you look at the back
of the target in this simulation it's
not moved at all right right so that the
pressure wave is the fastest signal
going through this system so this is
faster than the speed of sound that's
nothing it until it gets hit by the
shockwave there is no way of knowing
it's coming yeah exactly
the batteries I don't know doesn't even
know that it's been hit until the shock
wave gets there and the fusion event
happens halfway through that time so the
fusion is done finished the back the
target hasn't even moved yet
so we people expect when you hit this
know that it's like a billiard ball
right it's not it's so fast that our
normal physical intuition doesn't apply
it behaves more like liquid in fact it
does accurately behave like a liquid the
material strength is basically zero but
so this this illustrates what inertial
confinement is because it's kind of
conceptually more difficult than
magnetic fusion magnetic fusion is just
a big magnetic bottle which holds
fastened together here nothing is
holding this in place it's just in
vacuum by itself and but the gas when
it's compressed being compressed it
pushes on the plastic and the plastic
takes time to start moving it has
inertia so it's it's held together
simply by its own mass its own weight
for that fraction of a settlement and
that's long enough that you can get the
triple product to meet a lot of criteria
but there's a crucial piece to this
which is that this is the target from 10
years ago basically so most of our work
is what is on what we call advanced
target design so it's how do you get
more fusion performance at the same
projectile and the way we do that is by
changing what's inside this 15
millimeter cube of material and I kind
of think of it a bit like Minecraft you
can put whatever you like whatever
material you like wherever you like as
long as you can actually machine it or
manufacture it somehow yeah and to get
better performance and it turns out you
can get a lot better performance so how
much energy would one of those believes
each one of these will release the same
amount of energy as a barrel of oil
[Music]
so welcome to machine 3
it's a big thing isn't it so this is
where the magic happens yeah
there's very regular sound in the
background there is so that's the
heartbeat of machine 3 so that is the
cryogenic pumps that we use to pull the
vacuum that we need within the vacuum
chamber here this is the important bit
that's it
this is where all of the current
converges so the current converges down
these wide transmission lines inside to
what we call pizza slices so some
triangular transmission lines which go
to a load section in the middle top half
of the machine is charged positively the
negative half negatively and the
currents flow around this system this is
where the two halves of the machine are
joined through a bolt in the middle here
now you get huge currents up to 14
million amps that generates huge
magnetic pressures and that magnetic
pressure forces the small piece in the
middle which is the size of a 5 BP no
that is it it breaks out of the of the
platform breaks it breaks out it pushes
up and flows up the the chimney both
sides and that's our projectile so we
impact that into our target in the
middle of the chamber and then that's
where the shock physics take over that
the trick really is getting all of that
energy to flow into the center section
here it wants to go everywhere else
basically so you're hanging out the cats
that you're hurting our electrical
charge you produce this dirty and it
genuinely is spectacular speed getting
your jets out to movement our speeders
yeah it's no mean feat ya know the
fields between those two plates are
extremely light we're talking a thousand
Tesla or something like that so where
does it all mean
[Music]
so this is a consumable item and that's
our business model in fact is to make
them sell these and so the projectile
comes in it hits this it creates that
pulse of diffusion each each individual
target projectile every single one has
to be positive energy gain and then the
way you get to a power plant is you have
to repeat this at some repetition rate
so we want to in our in our point design
it's once every five seconds you have to
ping ping ping except a bit part one
suppressing yeah
and so that produces heat does it then
what happens that produces the best way
of thinking about that is it produces
the pulse of neutrons and because of the
reaction which is deuterium tritium
four-fifth that the energy goes with the
neutron so you need to absorb the
neutrons and then you've captured the
energy so in our reactor we use a liquid
lithium coolant which will absorb the
neutrons it will also protect all of the
structural steel from those neutrons and
that becomes the primary coolant so you
take that away and then you make make
steam and then you make power because
that is the most brilliant thing this is
the thing I love more than anything
about fusion technology and I'm sorry
it's not your target that's second on
the list
it's that behind all this clever physics
and this thing that happens in the
middle of a sudden there's a steam
engine yes indeed yeah yeah and I I
specifically I want to keep it as theme
engine because it's tear on line
completely known technology
I want one unproven thing in my reactor
which is this everything else I wanted
to be completely proven technology so
the idea of the reactor is that when
this once you demonstrate the physics
here and then you build something that
can kind of feed these things through
and then you've almost got conventional
power plants on the back end of it you
create steam you run a terrifying you
electricity goes into the grid it's it's
thermal power it's thermal power plant
and yeah I don't think fusion is
actually a disruptive technology it's a
it's a revolutionary technology but it's
business as usual it's centralized
generation its base load the disruptive
technology is solar and wind but we've
done a little work on this as you might
imagine because we bout spend another
five years of my life on this topic
we don't think that we can get
everything we need from just noodles we
need clean bass note as well it's fusion
still 40 years when you said nope well
we're aiming to demonstrate fusion this
year 2019 and then it'll be a five year
effort to build and execute a gain
experiment which is where you get more
out be getting more out and so it's a
bigger machine a bigger machine if we
knew it's gonna work we would have to do
the experiment right so we have to do
the experiment and in parallel we've
started proper work on the reactor
engineering now we are still looking
what we have to do there but everything
it's going to take us between five and
eight years
[Music]
here
I'm very serious I'm keeping quiet
[Music]
Spencer
it's amazing imagining what's happening
tirelessly a few little buttons pressed
here what's happening over there
[Music]
sixteen in Malaga collage religious
bigots forward into those passages now
is amazing we're about to let it all go
fully charged
awaiting trigger
let it be
see all the charging numbers going up at
the bottom creeping towards this line or
do you just realize I'm actually holding
my breath 60
I wasn't expecting it to be that loud I
can see why they want everyone to wear
these what happened when it all went
bang what happened at that point so when
it went bang the machine was actually
discharging so that is a shot itself
happening within a period of a couple of
microseconds but what sort of things are
you measuring when we're measuring in
principle voltage and current but we're
measuring in a very large number of
places and we're also having to measure
it quite accurately and quickly and
during the discharge so what you see on
the screen is all about the machine
itself so the health and how well the
Machine performed this is as distinct
from the experimental diagnostics right
which I obviously have most interest to
there for this for the science of the
experiment
the reason for this clobber is that
they're about to take the lid off this
and all the smushed up everything that
happens a lot of the experiments about
to come out so we need a bit of
protective gear
[Music]
lots of studies asking the question can
we have a hundred percent renewables
grid we can argue about it but the
answer is yes and seems well it's the
right answer to the wrong question
question is when we actually going to
get to that and there's there's a
deployment rate issue there's a simple
manufacturing capacity issue so and the
Tesla Giga Factory it produces enough
batteries in one year to power the US
for three minutes okay right tiny little
fraction that's the problem
and it's that deployment rate problem
which leads us to think that there is a
need for a clean baseload it's important
to say that I'm a huge supporter of
renewable yeah we every every watt of
renewable generation that we build
reduces climate change right and it
there'll be different mixes in different
places so actually California is not a
good example for fusion and I think this
is a lot of the thought leadership comes
from California
you're never gonna build a fusion power
plant in California they compare
themselves completely from solar and
batteries done the UK however Solar
results not very good we have great
offshore wind resource but offshore wind
does cost more and and again if you look
at the deployment rates there's a big
gap left at the end and the benefit is
it's about I mean the nice thing are all
these technologies they've all got they
work best in different places at
different time so if you mix them all
together you can always create an
ecosystem that works yeah but our view
is that that ecosystem will have to
include a clean base mode
sit-ins where we get to see the mess all
of that fantastically careful precision
engineering has just been shot to
smithereens and whatever is left is in
that
[Music]
well you want this thing looking like
it's had a hard life this bit of metal
these metal pieces here we call pizza
slicer spades survived between each shot
typically they do sometimes sustain
damage and it'll be repaired but
generally they will survive and all
parts outboard from that slide between
shots they come off they get all cleaned
up and redone but they do survive the
orange plastic you start this captain
installation or use up again within the
inner circle
got a load assembly itself you can see
the yellow in plastic which is actually
a large shape filling their home
the old vacuum chamber that's my life
type of plastic insulation it's a little
less high-performance
that will say get effectively destroyed
then damn easy on you
very expensive optical bench until you
lot blew it apart
[Music]
I've been so impressed by what I've seen
here today first light fusion are
clearly a company to watch and do keep
an eye out later this year for news of
fusion because it does seem like they're
going to do it on time just like they've
done everything else on time and it's
amazing that all of that technology is
hiding behind this not very distinctive
front in a business park in Oxford if
you enjoyed this do subscribe to patreon
and have a look at the fully charged so
website and if you have been thank you
for watching
[Music]
you